===PAGE 1===
AUTHOR’S ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT (AAM) — ACCEPTED TO IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS (RAL), 2025
1
GeNIE: A Generalizable Navigation System for In-the-Wild
Environments
Jiaming Wang1†, Diwen Liu1†, Jizhuo Chen1†, Jiaxuan Da1,
Nuowen Qian1, Minh Man Tram1, and Harold Soh1,2
Fig. 1: Diverse input scenes (top), traversability predictions (middle), and final path planning results (bottom) across test
environments unseen during training. GeNIE demonstrates strong generalization under challenging conditions, including heavy
rain, high-contrast lighting, muddy lenses, and diverse terrain types.
Abstract—Reliable navigation in unstructured, real-world en-
vironments remains a significant challenge for embodied agents,
especially when operating across diverse terrains, weather con-
ditions, and sensor configurations. In this paper, we introduce
GeNIE (Generalizable Navigation System for In-the-Wild Envi-
ronments), a robust navigation framework designed for global
deployment. GeNIE integrates a generalizable traversability pre-
diction model with a novel path fusion strategy that enhances
planning stability in noisy and ambiguous settings. We deployed
GeNIE in the Earth Rover Challenge (ERC) at ICRA 2025,
where it was evaluated across six countries spanning three
continents. GeNIE took first place and achieved 79% of the
maximum possible score, outperforming the second-best team
by 17%, and completed the entire competition without a single
human intervention. These results set a new benchmark for
robust, generalizable outdoor robot navigation. We have released
the codebase, pretrained model weights, and the datasets at
https://clear-nus.github.io/genie/ to support future research in
real-world navigation.
Index Terms—Autonomous Vehicle Navigation, Vision-Based
Navigation
I. INTRODUCTION
N
AVIGATION is a core skill for embodied agents, al-
lowing them to move purposefully through physical
environments using inputs from onboard sensors such as
cameras and GPS. It enables robots to reach goals, avoid
1Jiaming Wang, Diwen Liu, Jizhuo Chen, Jiaxuan Da, Nuowen Qian, Minh
Man Tram, and Harold Soh are with the Department of Computer Science,
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore. (email:
jiaming@comp.nus.edu.sg)
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
2Harold Soh is also with the Smart Systems Institute, National University
of Singapore (email: harold@nus.edu.sg)
Fig. 2: Examples of diverse terrains in ERC 2025, illustrating
the requirement for robots to identify traversable areas in
unstructured environments [1]. Reproduced with permission
from the ERC organizers.
obstacles, and operate autonomously in tasks like package
delivery, environmental monitoring, or search and rescue. Over
the past several years, numerous benchmarks and competitions
have been introduced to evaluate navigation systems, including
indoor simulation platforms such as Habitat [2] and Gib-
son [3], as well as outdoor field-based challenges focused on
specific domains like subterranean navigation or agricultural
environments. While these efforts have significantly advanced
the field, most benchmarks evaluate navigation within narrow
settings, often assuming a single type of scene, weather
condition, or embodiment. As a result, high scores on these
benchmarks often fail to generalize when deployed in more
diverse or unstructured environments [4], [5].
arXiv:2506.17960v2  [cs.RO]  18 Oct 2025

===PAGE 2===
Fig. 3: Overview of the GeNIE system. Given an RGB input image, the SAM-TP module predicts navigable regions in the
image space. These predictions are projected into a bird’s-eye view (BEV) cost map. Path fusion is then performed to identify
coherent and safe traversable paths, followed by path selection based on alignment with the goal direction. Finally, the control
module outputs linear and angular velocities to follow the selected path.
In real-world scenarios, however, navigation systems must
operate reliably across a wide variety of environments, includ-
ing different terrains, lighting conditions, and sensor configura-
tions, as illustrated in Figure 1. Domain shifts such as changing
weather, unexpected obstacles, or cultural variations in street
layout can easily degrade system performance if models have
not learned invariant features or robust policies [5]. In our
context here, we specifically refer to generalization as the
ability of a system to operate robustly across (i) different
terrain types imposed by testing in new locations, (ii) different
visual conditions caused by weather and lighting variations,
and (iii) different embodiments when deployed on distinct
robotic platforms. This framing aligns with the “Visual +
Behavioral” axes of generalization described in [6].
The Earth Rover Challenge (ERC) [7] serves as a rigorous
testbed for evaluating precisely this kind of generalization. In
this competition, identical sidewalk robots are deployed across
three continents and six countries, spanning both urban and
rural settings, and exposed to diverse real-world conditions,
including variations in weather, and terrain (see Fig. 2). Each
robot is a low-cost, four-wheeled platform equipped only with
noisy sensors, including a front and rear RGB camera, an IMU,
wheel encoders, and a GPS unit with limited accuracy, while
lacking any onboard computation. All perception and control
must run remotely over a 4G link, where visual data arrives
at only 3–5 Hz and inertial data below 10 Hz, introducing
substantial delays and packet loss. Missions consist of reaching
a sequence of GPS-defined checkpoints located hundreds of
meters to several kilometers apart, with a difficulty tier that
determines the score awarded. Partial credit is granted for
completing a subset of checkpoints, and teams may use a
limited number of brief tele-operated interventions, which
reduce the mission score.
These stringent constraints, including low-cost sensing,
slow and unreliable communication, and the absence of on-
board processing, render traditional SLAM-based mapping
and planning pipelines difficult to apply effectively. Instead,
systems must robustly identify traversable areas and plan
under uncertainty with minimal information, while tolerating
severe distribution shift across environments. The inaugural
2024 edition underscored this difficulty: the top-performing
autonomous system achieved only 36% of the total possible
score, far below the performance typically reported on stan-
dard academic benchmarks [7], [8].
To address these challenges, we propose GeNIE (General-
izable Navigation System for In-the-Wild Environments). An
overview of GeNIE is shown in Fig. 3. At its core lies a robust
traversability prediction model based on SAM2 [9], fine-tuned
on a newly annotated dataset comprising 15,347 road scenes
collected from diverse global environments. To efficiently
produce training labels, we developed a semi-automatic an-
notation pipeline that combines SAM2-generated masks with
lightweight human correction, significantly accelerating the
annotation process while maintaining quality.
At
inference
time,
the
model
outputs
a
pixel-wise
traversability map, which is projected into a bird’s-eye-view
cost map. From this map, random candidate paths are sampled
and scored according to their traversability. However, naively
selecting the path with the lowest cost often results in sub-
optimal behavior due to the presence of multiple, similarly
scored paths in noisy or ambiguous regions. To mitigate this,
we introduce a simple yet effective path fusion strategy that
merges nearby paths meeting traversability constraints. The
final navigation path is then selected from this fused set,
improving both stability and robustness.
Our system was deployed in the ERC ICRA 2025 competi-
tion and achieved 79% of the maximum score, outperforming
the second-best team by 17%. In summary, our main contri-
butions are as follows:
• We present GeNIE, a generalizable navigation system
that demonstrates state-of-the-art performance across de-
ployments in six countries spanning three continents, un-
der diverse terrain types, road styles, weather conditions,
and lighting. GeNIE achieves the highest performance to
date in these challenging real-world settings, setting a
new benchmark for generalizable navigation.
• We introduce a geographically diverse traversability an-
notation dataset comprising 15,347 road images from
20 countries. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the most geographically diverse dataset available for the
traversability prediction task.
• We release a held-out benchmark for traversability pre-
2

===PAGE 3===
diction, consisting of data collected from 18 countries
across 5 continents, featuring a wide variety of visual
appearances and terrain styles. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the first benchmark to evaluate traversability
prediction under such diverse real-world scenarios.
• We have publicly released our codebase, pretrained model
weights, annotated training dataset, and evaluation bench-
mark to support further research in real-world navigation.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Traversability Prediction
Recent work has advanced traversability prediction using
self-supervised and vision-based methods. WVN [10] and
WayFASTER [11] learn terrain affordances directly from RGB
images using self-supervision and short-horizon motion cues,
enabling fast adaptation in unlabeled wild environments. Jeon
et al. [12] fuse geometry and appearance for vehicle-specific
estimation, while Lambert et al. [13] rely on proprioception-
derived slip to label off-road terrain without human supervi-
sion.
Danesh et al. [14] apply domain adaptation to transfer
knowledge from simulation to real-world scenes. Probabilistic
methods like [15] model uncertainty explicitly to improve
safety on planetary rovers, and classical CNNs [16] remain
strong baselines in structured off-road terrains.
However, most existing methods do not generalize well to
unfamiliar terrains or degraded visual conditions. In contrast,
our method leverages the pre-trained vision foundation model
SAM2 [9] and a large, diverse dataset to achieve robust
and generalizable traversability prediction, enabling deploy-
ment across drastically different settings without environment-
specific retraining.
B. Trajectory Planning with Path Fusion
Sample-based planners like DWA [17] implicitly perform
path fusion by simulating velocity-parameterized rollouts and
selecting those optimizing safety and goal progress. Elastic
Band [18] and TEB [19] refine a global path into smooth,
tensioned corridors to mitigate local minima. Roll-out meth-
ods [20] simulate dynamics-aware trajectories in rough terrain,
while BiC-MPPI [21] clusters bidirectional rollouts to reduce
switching and enhance goal convergence.
Trajectory-level clustering has also been used for motion
prediction [22] and socially compliant navigation [23], demon-
strating that grouping geometrically or behaviorally similar
paths improves planning robustness. Silhouette-guided cluster-
ing [24] is often used to tune the number of clusters, favoring
precision in high-risk contexts.
Unlike these approaches, our method explicitly clusters
candidate paths sampled from a BEV traversability map. We
then fuse nearby paths and select the final trajectory based on
heading alignment with the goal. This strategy mimics human
navigation heuristics and enhances stability and success in
long-horizon outdoor planning.
Fig. 4: Comparison of traversability predictions (red regions)
from SAM, SAM2, VLM (gemini-2.5-flash), and our proposed
approach. For SAM, a text prompt describing navigable re-
gions is used directly. Since SAM2 does not support text
prompts, we first query the VLM (gemini-2.5-flash) to identify
relevant points in the image, which are then used as prompts
for SAM2.
III. METHOD
A. System Overview
Given an input RGB image, our system first predicts pixel-
wise traversability scores in the image space. The predicted
traversable regions are then projected into a local 2D bird’s-eye
view (BEV) cost map. Multiple candidate paths are sampled
from this BEV map. We then perform path fusion on the top-
K paths with the lowest traversability costs to generate more
stable and consistent trajectories. Finally, the best fused path
is selected based on its alignment with the goal location. An
overview of the system pipeline is illustrated in Figure 3.
B. Traversability Estimation
To robustly estimate traversability across diverse environ-
ments, we build upon the pretrained SAM2 model (sam2.1 hi-
era tiny). However, naive application of SAM2 was inadequate
for two main reasons. First, it tends to segment individual ob-
jects rather than the entire navigable surface, which often spans
multiple visually similar regions. For example, in scenes where
the flat ground is divided by markings or textures, SAM2
frequently outputs fragmented segments covering only parts of
the traversable area. Second, SAM2 requires explicit point or
bounding box prompts for inference and cannot directly gen-
erate masks based on the abstract concept of traversable area.
While models like SAM support text prompts, they perform
poorly on traversability segmentation tasks (see Figure 4).
Due to the lack of existing datasets for traversability
segmentation across diverse terrains, we developed a semi-
automatic annotation pipeline built on the FrodoBot dataset.
Our data collection spans outdoor scenes from seven countries,
covering a wide range of environments including grasslands,
urban parks, deserts, and rural roads. To support scalable an-
notation, we used SAM2-generated region proposals as initial
masks, which human annotators refined using a lightweight
graphical interface. This process enabled the creation of
3

===PAGE 4===
15,347 high-quality annotated frames with minimal manual
effort.
A key feature of our dataset is that each traversable mask
includes only regions that are directly navigable from the
robot’s current position, typically located near the bottom
center of the image. This constraint ensures that the model
learns to predict not just static free space, but the subset
of the scene that is immediately reachable, thereby making
the learned traversability more actionable for downstream
planning (Figure 4)
To eliminate the reliance on manually provided prompts
during inference, we removed the prompt encoder and instead
directly optimized a learnable prompt token. Conceptually, this
token encodes the notion of a “traversable” or “navigable”
area. We refer to this modified version of SAM2 as SAM-TP
(SAM for Traversability Prediction). All SAM-TP models are
initialized with SAM2 pretrained weights [9] and trained on
our annotated dataset using the Adam optimizer with a batch
size of 20, a learning rate of 1×10−6, and 10 epochs. Training
was performed on a single A100 GPU and required less than
4 hours.
• SAM-TP (D1): Fine-tunes only the last block of the two
blocks in the mask decoder.
• SAM-TP (D2): Fine-tunes all blocks of the mask de-
coder.
• SAM-TP (E6): Fine-tunes all layers of the mask decoder
and the last 6 of the 12 blocks in the image encoder.
• SAM-TP (Ours): Fine-tunes all layers of both the mask
decoder and the image encoder.
To more thoroughly assess generalization capabilities, we
collected an additional set of 484 images across 17 countries,
encompassing a wide range of terrain types, weather condi-
tions, and lighting scenarios. All images in this benchmark
were excluded from training and annotated using our semi-
automatic pipeline. This dataset provides a benchmark for
evaluating model performance under realistic conditions. We
organize the benchmark into three categories:
• Normal (N): Contains 167 scenes captured under typical
conditions, including mild lighting and clearly defined
paths. This set serves as the baseline for model perfor-
mance.
• Difficult (D): Comprises 160 scenes featuring challeng-
ing conditions commonly observed in the Earth Rover
Challenge, such as uneven terrain, heavy rain, strong
shadows, overexposure, occlusions, and visually frag-
mented surfaces caused by markings or textures. This set
is designed to assess the model’s robustness to real-world
variability.
• Cross-embodiment
(CE): Includes 157 scenes col-
lected using a different robot platform (FrodoBot Mini),
which differs significantly in height, aspect ratio, camera
placement, and optical characteristics compared to the
FrodoBot Zero used during training. This set evaluates
the model’s ability to generalize across embodiments.
In addition to evaluating variants of the SAM-TP model,
we also benchmarked several baselines using our proposed
test set:
Method
IoU across three datasets ↑
Normal
Difficult
CE
WVN [10]
0.6157
0.4684
0.4551
SAM [25]
0.8759
0.7270
0.7610
VLM [26]
0.6528
0.5251
0.6206
SAM-TP (single scene)
0.8662
0.6867
0.8230
SAM-TP (20% dataset)
0.9120
0.7503
0.8889
SAM-TP (50% dataset)
0.9237
0.7758
0.9071
SAM-TP (D1)
0.8337
0.6572
0.8215
SAM-TP (D2)
0.8480
0.6843
0.8375
SAM-TP (E6)
0.9248
0.7974
0.9256
Ours
0.9289
0.7989
0.9262
TABLE I: Zero-shot segmentation accuracy on our test dataset.
The table reports the average Intersection over Union (IoU)
across three evaluation conditions: normal, difficult, and cross-
embodiment (CE). It compares baseline methods, our proposed
approach trained with different dataset subsets, and various
fine-tuning strategies. “SAM-TP (D1)” and “SAM-TP (D2)”
denote partial fine-tuning of the mask decoder; “SAM-TP
(E6)” includes additional encoder layers; and “Ours” fine-
tunes the entire image encoder and mask decoder.
• WVN [10]: The traversability prediction model intro-
duced in [10].
• SAM [25]: The original SAM model prompted with a
text description of the navigable region.
• VLM gemini-2.5-flash [26]: A vision-language model,
gemini-flash-2.5, which directly generates segmentation
masks in response to textual queries.
• SAM-TP (single scene): SAM-TP fine-tuned on a dataset
collected from a single environment.
• SAM-TP (20%): SAM-TP fine-tuned using 20% of the
full training dataset.
• SAM-TP (50%): SAM-TP fine-tuned using 50% of the
full training dataset.
The benchmark results are summarized in Table I. The
Difficult test set presents significant challenges for all models,
highlighting the complexity of real-world conditions. Among
all methods, the proposed SAM-TP achieves the highest per-
formance, demonstrating strong generalization across diverse
environmental conditions and robotic embodiments.
C. Bird’s-Eye View Map Generation
Due to the lack of a depth camera on our robotic platform,
we could not construct the bird’s-eye view (BEV) map by
directly projecting point clouds, as is commonly done. While
several monocular depth estimation models exist [27], [28], we
found that their predictions are insufficiently accurate for our
application. Inaccurate depth estimates can result in critical
failures such as collisions or the robot falling into a trench.
To overcome this, we adopt a simple yet effective approach
that leverages the segmented traversable regions and a known
camera height prior, which is a parameter typically available
in robot systems. Instead of relying on the standard pinhole
camera model, which fails under severe lens distortion, we
4

===PAGE 5===
use a generic camera model [29] to calibrate the camera. This
calibration yields a directional ray vector ˆd for each pixel in
the image.
For any pixel classified as traversable, we assume the
corresponding 3D point lies on the ground plane. Given the
known camera height h, we solve for the scale s in the
equation: s ˆdy = −h. This allows us to recover the 3D position
of the pixel in the camera coordinate frame as s ˆd. These points
are then projected into the BEV map.
D. Path Planning and Fusion
Given the BEV cost map, the robot must predict a safe and
traversable path that ideally leads toward the goal. A common
strategy is to use sample-based planning [10], where candidate
paths are sampled from the robot’s current position toward
the goal—or toward intermediate goals if the final goal is far
away. The optimal path is then selected by minimizing a cost
function of the form:
C(l) =
n
X
i=1
f(pi) + β
n
X
i=1
g(pi)
(1)
where pi is the i-th waypoint along the sampled path, f(·)
is the cost derived from the traversability map, and g(·) is a
goal-directed cost that encourages progress toward the target.
However, this strategy often performs poorly when the goal
lies hundreds of meters away. Two main issues arise:
1) Difficulty balancing traversability and goal costs:
When the goal-directed term g(·) dominates the cost
function, the robot tends to move greedily toward the
goal while ignoring environmental structure. This often
results in myopic behavior and causes the robot to
fall into local minima. Conversely, if the traversability
cost f(·) dominates, the robot may ignore the goal and
choose suboptimal paths that appear easier to traverse
but lead in the wrong direction. In practice, there is no
single value of β that works robustly across all scenarios,
and adaptively tuning β at runtime is not feasible.
Representative failure cases are shown in Figure 5.
2) Path switching due to cost equivalence: In real-world
deployments, robots typically employ a receding horizon
strategy, continuously replanning as new observations
become available. However, when many candidate paths
have similar costs, the robot may frequently switch
between them, leading to unstable behavior and slow
overall progress.
Tuning the weight β between the goal-directed term and the
traversability cost does not resolve these issues, as different
situations require different trade-offs. Ideally, the robot should
adaptively balance these objectives based on the current con-
text. As shown in Figure 6, the success rate of path selection
under this naive strategy remains low across a wide range of
β values.
In contrast, humans rarely plan paths at the pixel level.
Instead, we abstract navigable structure from visual inputs and
reason at a higher level: along paths or tracks [30]. Whether
following an urban road or an informal dirt path flanked by
grass, we tend to follow the path until a junction appears, and
(a) No fusion (β too small)
(b) No fusion (β too large)
(c) With path fusion
(d) With path fusion
Fig. 5: Comparison of failure and success cases under different
path planning strategies. The first and third rows show the
robot’s current observation overlaid with the projected planned
trajectory. The second and fourth rows display the BEV cost
map with sampled paths; the selected path is shown in red,
and the green dot at the edge of the map indicates the goal
direction. Without path fusion, the planner tends to select paths
with lower traversability when β is small, or gets stuck in local
minima when β is large. In contrast, path fusion succeeds in
both scenarios.
only then do we make directional decisions. This behavior
reflects a strong prior: if a path leads generally toward the
goal, it is likely to be successful. This prior holds in many
real-world outdoor settings.
To incorporate this prior, we propose a simple but effective
planning method that operates at the path level. Given the BEV
cost map, we first sample candidate paths from the robot’s
current position to intermediate goals within its current field
of view. These paths are parameterized as first- and second-
order polynomials connecting the start and end points. We then
filter these candidates using the BEV cost map and retain the
top N lowest-cost paths.
To detect the traversable paths, we apply path fusion to
the top N candidate paths. We first cluster these paths using
5

===PAGE 6===
Method
PIP (%) ↑
PIR (%) ↑
PSA (%) ↑
No Fusion (β = 0.1)
-
-
27.3
No Fusion (β = 1)
-
-
42.9
No Fusion (β = 10)
-
-
36.4
k-means Only
75.0
75.0
61.9
Euclidean Selection
84.6
57.9
71.4
Ours
84.6
57.9
85.7
TABLE II: Evaluation of path fusion and selection strategies
with Path Identification Precision (PIP), Path Identification
Recall (PIR), and Path Selection Accuracy (PSA).
adaptive k-means, where clustering is based on the Euclidean
distance between corresponding waypoints across different
paths. The number of clusters k is determined by optimizing
the silhouette loss, which balances intra-cluster compactness
and inter-cluster separation.
The silhouette loss is defined as the negative of the average
silhouette coefficient across all data points:
Lsilhouette = −1
N
N
X
i=1
b(i) −a(i)
max{a(i), b(i)},
(2)
where a(i) is the average distance between sample i and
all other points in the same cluster, and b(i) is the minimum
average distance between sample i and points in the nearest
neighboring cluster. A higher silhouette coefficient indicates
better clustering quality, and minimizing the negative value
guides the model toward an optimal number of clusters.
Since minimizing silhouette loss tends to favor finer-grained
clusters, we perform a post-processing step to merge any
clusters whose centroids lie within a predefined distance
threshold. The centroid of each merged group is used as the
final representative path.
We define a false positive (FP) merge as the erroneous
merging of distinct paths that should remain separate, e.g.,
merging two paths split by an obstacle, potentially leading to
unsafe planning. Conversely, a false negative (FN) merge oc-
curs when two similar paths are not merged despite being part
of the same structure. While FPs can lead to critical failures
(e.g., collisions), FNs simply preserve redundant safe paths.
Hence, we prefer precision over recall in determining the
merging threshold. A Precision–Recall (PR) curve illustrating
this trade-off is shown in Figure 6 (a).
After path fusion, if only a single representative path
remains, we select it as the final plan. If multiple paths remain,
we choose the one most aligned with the goal direction.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our path fusion and selection
approach, we curated a test set consisting of road images with
varying numbers of path branches, annotated by human raters.
We use the following metrics in our empirical study:
• Path Identification Precision (PIP): The proportion of
correctly merged path branches (true positives) out of all
predicted path merges.
• Path Identification Recall (PIR): The proportion of
correctly identified path branches (true positives) out of
all ground truth two-branch cases.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10
20
30
40
Recall
Precision
PR Curve
0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 2.0 5.010.0
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
β
Accuracy
Path Selection Accuracy
(a) Precision–Recall
(b) Accuracy vs. β
Fig. 6: (a) Precision–Recall curve for different merging thresh-
old for path identification (b) Path selection accuracy for No
Fusion, as a function of β.
• Path Selection Accuracy (PSA): The percentage of
cases where the selected path matches the human-
annotated correct branch.
We evaluate several variants of our pipeline:
• No Fusion (NF): Directly selects the lowest-cost path
from the sampled set using the cost function in Equa-
tion 1.
• k-Means Only (KM): Clusters paths using k-means,
without any post-processing or merging.
• Euclidean Selection (ES): Uses k-means + merge, then
selects the path whose endpoint is closest (Euclidean
distance) to the goal.
• Angular Selection (Ours): Uses k-means + merge, then
selects the path with heading direction most aligned with
the goal direction.
The results are summarized in Table II. The no-fusion
strategy yields the lowest path selection accuracy, and tuning
the weight β does not improve performance, as shown in
Figure 6(b). While using k-means alone results in the highest
path identification recall due to the adaptive k-means assigning
more clusters, it suffers from low path identification precision
and lower path selection accuracy compared to strategies that
include a merging step.
Among the merging-based strategies, selecting the path
whose heading direction is most aligned with the goal direction
achieves the highest path selection accuracy. This result aligns
with intuitive human path planning behavior, where a balance
between feasibility and goal alignment is naturally considered.
Some of the visualized path fusion results are shown in
Figure 5
Putting everything together, our planning algorithm is sum-
marized in Algorithm 1. In our implementation, the random
path set is generated only once at initialization, and only cost
evaluations are updated during each planning cycle—making
the approach computationally efficient.
E. Closed-loop Control
The control module implements a simple waypoint-tracking
policy that prioritizes robustness over efficiency. Our system
operates in a receding-horizon loop: at each timestep, the latest
6

===PAGE 7===
Algorithm 1: Path Planning with Path Fusion
Input: Random paths T = {l1, l2, . . . , lM}, GPS goal
g, RGB image I, traversability model ϕ
Output: Selected trajectory l∗
1 m = ProjectToBEV(ϕ(I)) ; // BEV cost map
2 TK ←TopKlj∈T [P
i m(pi)] ; // Top-K paths
3 C ←AdaptiveKMeans(TK) ; // Clustering
4 Cmerged ←MergeCloseCentroids(C)
5 if |Cmerged| = 1 then
6
l∗←Centroid(Cmerged)
7 else
8
l∗←arg minl∈Cmerged̸
(l, g)
9 return l∗
observation is used to replan a path via Algorithm 1, and the
robot then executes the trajectory toward the first waypoint
before repeating the process with updated input. A collision-
avoidance mechanism runs continuously in parallel, monitor-
ing the predicted traversability map from each incoming frame
to halt motion if a nearby hazard is detected. Concretely,
after each planning step the robot aligns its heading with
the next waypoint, and then advances by 1 m, unless the
collision-avoidance module signals low traversability in the
near-front region. Since our SAM-TP model runs at 10 Hz
on an RTX 3090 GPU while frames arrive at only 3–5 Hz,
collision checks can be executed in real time without adding
latency. The planning module itself runs at approximately 5
Hz. Although this synchronous replan–align–move cycle is
less efficient than continuous controllers such as DWA, it
was deliberately chosen for robustness under the high-latency
conditions of ERC.
In some cases, the planner may guide the robot into dead
ends such as dense grass, enclosed areas, or regions near
obstacles, where it fails to find a valid path. To handle these
situations, we introduce a vision-language model (VLM)-
assisted recovery module. Given a short history of recent
observations, the VLM is prompted with a natural language
query on how to return to the previously navigable route. This
allows the robot to recover from local failures using high-
level semantic reasoning. Please see the online supplementary
material for further details.
IV. ERC COMPETITION RESULTS
The GeNIE system was deployed in the 2025 Earth Rover
Challenge (ERC) across Africa, South America, and North
America. In each mission, the robot, equipped with front
and rear RGB cameras, IMU, wheel encoders, and GPS, was
tasked with reaching a sequence of GPS-defined checkpoints
over distances of several hundred meters to a few kilometers.
Scoring was based on mission difficulty and the number
of checkpoints completed, with penalties applied for human
interventions, and a score of zero if the robot flipped over.
The overall competition setup and scoring rules are described
in Section I and in [7].
We report the following evaluation metrics:
Team
Total Score ↑
Norm. Score ↑
Interventions ↓
Human Player
30.00
1.00
-
GeNIE (ours)
23.78
0.79
0
Team A
18.74
0.62
1
Team B
8.07
0.27
11
Team C
7.39
0.25
2
Team D
5.89
0.20
6
TABLE III: Leaderboard summary of the top 5 teams from
the challenge. The normalized score is computed relative to
the maximum possible score of 30.
• Total Score: The cumulative score earned by the team,
calculated according to the scoring rules described above.
• Normalized Score: The total score divided by the max-
imum possible score (30), providing a percentage-based
measure of performance.
• Interventions: The total number of human interventions
used across all missions in which the team score was
non-zero1
Our system achieved 79% of the maximum possible score,
outperforming the second-place team by 17%. Full results are
provided in Table III. Notably, our system required zero human
interventions, demonstrating its robustness and adaptability
across challenging and varied environments.
V. CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS
In this paper, we present GeNIE, a navigation system
capable of generalizing across a wide range of real-world
environments. The key to this generalization lies in two com-
ponents: (1) a robust traversability prediction model, and (2)
an effective path planning strategy based on path fusion. Our
system demonstrated strong performance in the Earth Rover
Challenge (ERC), achieving first place across deployments in
six countries.
GeNIE is not without limitations. The system failed to
complete three missions during ERC: one mission resulted
in a zero score due to a local minimum problem, and two
missions yielded only partial scores due to inefficient control
under high latency.
The local minimum problem arises because the system relies
on single-frame traversability predictions without maintaining
a local map, which limits its ability to reason over longer
horizons. In Mission 9, for example, the robot refused to enter
a passage with low predicted traversability, not realizing it was
the only viable route to the target. Such cases suggest that ef-
fective traversability prediction may require persistent memory
and long-term reasoning, enabling the robot to integrate past
observations and replan accordingly.
A second limitation is the conservative control strat-
egy adopted to ensure robustness under high-latency condi-
tions. The robot executes commands in a sequential “ob-
1This differs from the official count which is total number of interventions
across all missions, regardless of score. This better reflects the model’s ability
to navigate since zero scores indicate a non-recoverable failure (e.g., the robot
flipping over).
7

===PAGE 8===
serve–plan–execute–wait” cycle rather than continuously re-
planning. While this avoids overshooting behaviors, it reduces
efficiency and caused timeouts in two missions. Incorporating
more latency-aware or hybrid control strategies could improve
efficiency without compromising robustness.
Finally, our BEV projection assumes a locally flat ground
plane, which is generally valid within the 8 m planning
horizon but may introduce errors on steep slopes. Although
this did not cause failures in ERC, integrating depth sensing or
monocular depth estimation could further improve reliability.
Another limitation is that the current representation uses a
single traversability token, which may be insufficient for robots
with fundamentally different embodiments (e.g., legged versus
wheeled).
Addressing these limitations by incorporating spatial mem-
ory for long-horizon reasoning, improving control strategies
under latency, and relaxing the flat-ground assumption repre-
sents an important direction for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research / project is supported by A*STAR under its
National Robotics Programme (NRP) (Award M23NBK0053).
REFERENCES
[1] Earth Rover Challenge, “ERC’25 Recording,” https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=LN99BnqhIdg, 2025.
[2] M. Savva, A. X. Chang, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Funkhouser, and V. Koltun,
“Habitat: A platform for embodied ai research,” Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp.
9339–9347, 2019.
[3] F. Xia, A. R. Martin, A. Naveen, and et al., “Gibson env: Real-
world perception for embodied agents,” Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
9068–9079, 2018.
[4] S. K. Ramakrishnan, U. Jain, E. Wijmans, Y. Li, P. Anderson, and
D. Batra, “Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (hm3d): 1000+ large-scale 3d
environments for embodied ai,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
[5] F. Xia, R. Mottaghi, S. Savarese et al., “Generalization in embodied
navigation: A survey,” Foundations and Trends in Robotics, vol. 11,
no. 3, pp. 162–195, 2023.
[6] J. Gao, S. Belkhale, S. Dasari, A. Balakrishna, D. Shah, and D. Sadigh,
“A taxonomy for evaluating generalist robot policies,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.01238, 2025.
[7] “The EarthRover Challenge - 2025 — earth-rover-challenge.github.io,”
https://earth-rover-challenge.github.io/, [Accessed 29-05-2025].
[8] X. Xiao, J. Tan, M. Cho, D. Hsu, D. Shah, J. Truong, T. Xiao,
N. Yokoyama, W. Yu, T. Zhang et al., “Autonomous mario kart in
the wild: Lessons learned from the earth rover challenge at iros 2024
[competitions],” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 189–196, 2025.
[9] A. Kirillov, K. He, and P. Doll´ar, “Segment anything model 2 (sam2),”
https://segment-anything.com, 2024, technical report, Meta AI.
[10] J. Frey, M. Mattamala, N. Chebrolu, C. Cadena, M. Fallon, and
M. Hutter, “Fast Traversability Estimation for Wild Visual Navigation,”
in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems, Daegu, Republic of
Korea, July 2023.
[11] M. V. Gasparino, A. N. Sivakumar, and G. Chowdhary, “Wayfaster: A
self-supervised traversability prediction for increased navigation aware-
ness,” in ICRA, 2024.
[12] Y. Jeon, E. I. Son, and S.-W. Seo, “Follow the footprints: Self-
supervised traversability estimation for off-road vehicle navigation based
on geometric and visual cues,” RA-L, 2024.
[13] A. Lambert, B. Boots, and J. Lee, “Learning off-road terrain traversabil-
ity with self-supervisions only,” in CoRL, 2023.
[14] M. Danesh et al., “Terrain traversability prediction through self-
supervised learning and unsupervised domain adaptation,” Autonomous
Robots, 2024.
[15] M. Endo, T. Taniai, and G. Ishigami, “Deep probabilistic traversability
with test-time adaptation for uncertainty-aware planetary rover naviga-
tion,” RA-L, 2024.
[16] D. Lee et al., “Deep learning traversability estimator for mobile robots
in unstructured environments,” in IROS, 2021.
[17] D. Fox, W. Burgard, and S. Thrun, “The dynamic window approach to
collision avoidance,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 23–33, 1997.
[18] S. Quinlan and O. Khatib, “Elastic bands: Connecting path planning
and control,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 1993, pp. 802–807.
[19] C. R¨osmann, F. Hoffmann, and T. Bertram, “Integrated online trajec-
tory planning and optimization in distinctive topologies,” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, vol. 88, pp. 142–153, 2017.
[20] G. Sten, L. Feng, and B. M¨oller, “An efficient trajectory roll-out
algorithm for autonomous articulated vehicles in forest terrain,” Preprint,
2025.
[21] M. Jung and K. Kim, “Bic-mppi: Goal-pursuing, sampling-based bidi-
rectional rollout clustering path integral for trajectory optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06493, 2024.
[22] C. Sung, D. Feldman, and D. Rus, “Trajectory clustering for motion pre-
diction,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
2012.
[23] E. Pruc, S. Zilberstein, and J. Biswas, “Dense crowd flow-informed path
planning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00705, 2022.
[24] P. J. Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and
validation of cluster analysis,” Journal of Computational and Applied
Mathematics, vol. 20, pp. 53–65, 1987.
[25] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson,
T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo et al., “Segment anything,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
[26] G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut,
J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth, K. Millican et al., “Gemini: a family
of highly capable multimodal models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805,
2023.
[27] L. Yang, B. Kang, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, J. Feng, and H. Zhao,
“Depth anything v2,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, vol. 37, pp. 21 875–21 911, 2024.
[28] A. Bochkovskii, A. Delaunoy, H. Germain, M. Santos, Y. Zhou, S. R.
Richter, and V. Koltun, “Depth pro: Sharp monocular metric depth in
less than a second,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02073, 2024.
[29] T. Schops, V. Larsson, M. Pollefeys, and T. Sattler, “Why having
10,000 parameters in your camera model is better than twelve,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 2535–2544.
[30] J. Balaguer, C. Summerfield, D. Hassabis, and H. J. Spiers, “Neural
mechanisms of hierarchical planning in a virtual subway network,”
Neuron, vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 893–903, 2016.
8

